docs/tools/visualvm.md, before:

---
layout: docs
toc_group: tools
link_title: VisualVM
permalink: /tools/visualvm/
---

# VisualVM

GraalVM provides support for [VisualVM](https://visualvm.github.io), the all-in-one Java (and polyglot) monitoring and troubleshooting tool. 
VisualVM enables powerful yet easy-to-use Java tooling which includes heap analysis for the supported guest languages. The following languages and features are currently available:

 - __Java:__ Heap Summary, Objects View, Threads View, OQL Console
 - __JavaScript:__ Heap Summary, Objects View, Thread View
 - __Python:__ Heap Summary, Objects View
 - __Ruby:__ Heap Summary, Objects View, Threads View
 - __R:__ Heap Summary, Objects View

### Starting VisualVM

1. Download the latest VisualVM from [visualvm.github.io](http://visualvm.github.io/), unzip, and move it to the applications directory.

2. Double-click on the application icon to start. 

Immediately after startup, the tool shows all locally running Java processes in the Applications area, including the VisualVM process, itself.

### Capture a Heap Dump
To capture a heap dump of, for example, a Ruby application for later analysis, start your application and let it run for a few seconds to warm up.
Then right-click its process in VisualVM and invoke the Heap Dump action.
A new heap viewer for the Ruby process opens.

__Note:__ Heap dump support must be explicitly enabled when using [Native Image](../reference-manual/native-image/README.md).
Add the `--enable-monitoring=heapdump,jvmstat` option when invoking the `native-image` tool to enable the heap dump feature and allow VisualVM to detect native executables via `jvmstat`.
This way your application will handle signals and capture a heap dump when it receives the `SIGUSR1` signal.
See the [Generating Native Heap Dumps](../reference-manual/native-image/guides/create-heap-dump-from-native-executable.md) page for details on capturing heap dumps from a native image process.

### Analyzing Objects
Initially the Summary view for the Java heap is displayed.
To analyze the Ruby heap, click the leftmost (Summary) dropdown in the Heap Viewer toolbar, choose the Ruby Heap scope and select the Objects view.
Now the heap viewer displays all Ruby heap objects, aggregated by their type.

Expand the Proc node in the Results view to see a list of objects of this type.
Each object displays its logical value as provided by the underlying implementation.
Expand the objects to access their variables and references, where available.

![VisualVM: Heap Viewer Objects](img/HeapViewer_objects.png)

Now enable the Preview, Variables, and References details by clicking the buttons in the toolbar, and select the individual _ProcType_ objects.
Where available, the Preview view shows the corresponding source fragment, the Variables view shows variables of the object, and the References view shows objects referring to the selected object.

Last, use the Presets dropdown in the Heap Viewer toolbar to switch the view from All Objects to Dominators or GC Roots.
To display the heap dominators, retained sizes must be computed first, which can take a few minutes for the _server.rb_ example.
Select the Objects aggregation in the toolbar to view the individual dominators or GC roots.

![VisualVM: Heap Viewer Objects Dominators](img/HeapViewer_objects_dominators.png)

### Analyzing Threads
Click the leftmost dropdown in the Heap Viewer toolbar and select the Threads view for the Ruby heap.
The heap viewer now displays the Ruby thread stack trace, including local objects. The stack trace can alternatively be displayed textually by clicking the HTML toolbar button.

![VisualVM: Heap Viewer Thread](img/HeapViewer_thread.png)

### Reading JFR Snapshots
The VisualVM tool bundled with GraalVM 19.2.x and later has the ability to read JFR snapshots -- snapshots taken with JDK Flight Recorder (previously Java Flight Recorder).
JFR is a tool for collecting diagnostic and profiling data about a running Java application.
It is integrated into the Java Virtual Machine (JVM) and causes almost no performance overhead, so it can be used even in heavily loaded production environments.

To install the JFR support, released as a plugin:
1. Run `$JAVA_HOME/bin/jvisualvm` to start VisualVM;
2. Navigate to Tools > Plugins > Available Plugins to list all available plugins, then install the _VisualVM-JFR_ and
_VisualVM-JFR-Generic_ modules.

The JFR snapshots can be opened using either the File > Load action, or by double-clicking the JFR Snapshots node and adding the snapshot into the JFR
repository, permanently.
Please follow the documentation for your Java version to create JFR snapshots.

The JFR viewer reads all JFR snapshots created from Java 7 onward, and presents the data in typical VisualVM views familiar to the tool users.

![VisualVM: Viewing JFR via VisualVM](img/visualvm_jfr.png)

These views and functionality tabs are currently available:

* Overview tab - displays the basic information about the recorded process like
its main class, arguments, JVM version and configuration, and system properties.
This tab also provides access to the recorded thread dumps.
* Monitor tab - shows the process uptime and basic telemetry: CPU usage, Heap
and Metaspace utilization, number of loaded classes, and number of live & started
threads.
* Threads tab - reconstructs the threads timeline based on all events recorded in
the snapshot as precisely as possible, based on the recording configuration.
* Locks tab - allows the user to analyze threads synchronization.
* File IO tab - presents information on read and write events to the filesystem.
* Socket IO tab - presents information on read and write events to the network.
* Sampler tab - shows per-thread CPU utilization and memory allocations, and a
heap histogram. There is also an experimental feature, "CPU sampler," for building a CPU
snapshot from the recorded events. It does not provide an exact performance
analysis but still helps to understand what was going on in the recorded
application, and where the CPU bottleneck might be.
* Browser tab - provides a generic browser of all events recorded in the snapshot.
* Environment tab - gives an overview of the recording machine setup and conditions
like CPU model, memory size, operating system version, CPU utilization, memory
usage, etc.
* Recording tab - lists the recording settings and basic snapshot telemetry like
number of events, total recording time, etc.

Note: The support of JDK Flight Recorder is currently experimental. Some advanced features like analyzing JVM internals, showing event stack traces, or support for creating JFR snapshots from live processes are not available in this preview version and will be addressed incrementally in the following releases.

Commit message:

Update VisualVM documentation and add more validation for the option '--enable-monitoring'.
(cherry picked from commit 42fa59e2b3b557747b137936ff0f5b9b6b3f1a1f)

docs/tools/visualvm.md, after:

---
layout: docs
toc_group: tools
link_title: VisualVM
permalink: /tools/visualvm/
---

# VisualVM

GraalVM provides support for [VisualVM](https://visualvm.github.io), the all-in-one Java (and polyglot) monitoring and troubleshooting tool. 
VisualVM enables powerful yet easy-to-use Java tooling which includes heap analysis for the supported guest languages. The following languages and features are currently available:

 - __Java:__ Heap Summary, Objects View, Threads View, OQL Console
 - __JavaScript:__ Heap Summary, Objects View, Thread View
 - __Python:__ Heap Summary, Objects View
 - __Ruby:__ Heap Summary, Objects View, Threads View
 - __R:__ Heap Summary, Objects View

### Starting VisualVM

1. Download the latest VisualVM from [visualvm.github.io](http://visualvm.github.io/), unzip, and move it to the applications directory.

2. Double-click on the application icon to start. 

Immediately after startup, the tool shows all locally running Java processes in the Applications area, including the VisualVM process, itself.

### Using VisualVM with GraalVM Native Executables

> Note: VisualVM support for GraalVM native executables is not yet available on Windows.

When using GraalVM [Native Image](../reference-manual/native-image/README.md), VisualVM support is disabled by default.
VisualVM support can be enabled when building a native executable with the option `--enable-monitoring=jvmstat,heapdump`:
```shell
native-image --enable-monitoring=jvmstat,heapdump JavaApplication
```

### Capture a Heap Dump
To capture a heap dump for later analysis, start your application and let it run for a few seconds to warm up.
Then right-click its process in VisualVM and invoke the Heap Dump action.

### Analyzing Objects
Initially the Summary view for the Java heap is displayed.
To analyze the Ruby heap, click the leftmost (Summary) dropdown in the Heap Viewer toolbar, choose the Ruby Heap scope and select the Objects view.
Now the heap viewer displays all Ruby heap objects, aggregated by their type.

Expand the Proc node in the Results view to see a list of objects of this type.
Each object displays its logical value as provided by the underlying implementation.
Expand the objects to access their variables and references, where available.

![VisualVM: Heap Viewer Objects](img/HeapViewer_objects.png)

Now enable the Preview, Variables, and References details by clicking the buttons in the toolbar, and select the individual _ProcType_ objects.
Where available, the Preview view shows the corresponding source fragment, the Variables view shows variables of the object, and the References view shows objects referring to the selected object.

Last, use the Presets dropdown in the Heap Viewer toolbar to switch the view from All Objects to Dominators or GC Roots.
To display the heap dominators, retained sizes must be computed first, which can take a few minutes for the _server.rb_ example.
Select the Objects aggregation in the toolbar to view the individual dominators or GC roots.

![VisualVM: Heap Viewer Objects Dominators](img/HeapViewer_objects_dominators.png)

### Analyzing Threads
Click the leftmost dropdown in the Heap Viewer toolbar and select the Threads view for the Ruby heap.
The heap viewer now displays the Ruby thread stack trace, including local objects. The stack trace can alternatively be displayed textually by clicking the HTML toolbar button.

![VisualVM: Heap Viewer Thread](img/HeapViewer_thread.png)

### Reading JFR Snapshots
The VisualVM tool bundled with GraalVM 19.2.x and later has the ability to read JFR snapshots -- snapshots taken with JDK Flight Recorder (previously Java Flight Recorder).
JFR is a tool for collecting diagnostic and profiling data about a running Java application.
It is integrated into the Java Virtual Machine (JVM) and causes almost no performance overhead, so it can be used even in heavily loaded production environments.

To install the JFR support, released as a plugin:
1. Run `$JAVA_HOME/bin/jvisualvm` to start VisualVM;
2. Navigate to Tools > Plugins > Available Plugins to list all available plugins, then install the _VisualVM-JFR_ and
_VisualVM-JFR-Generic_ modules.

The JFR snapshots can be opened using either the File > Load action, or by double-clicking the JFR Snapshots node and adding the snapshot into the JFR
repository, permanently.
Please follow the documentation for your Java version to create JFR snapshots.

The JFR viewer reads all JFR snapshots created from Java 7 onward, and presents the data in typical VisualVM views familiar to the tool users.

![VisualVM: Viewing JFR via VisualVM](img/visualvm_jfr.png)

These views and functionality tabs are currently available:

* Overview tab - displays the basic information about the recorded process like
its main class, arguments, JVM version and configuration, and system properties.
This tab also provides access to the recorded thread dumps.
* Monitor tab - shows the process uptime and basic telemetry: CPU usage, Heap
and Metaspace utilization, number of loaded classes, and number of live & started
threads.
* Threads tab - reconstructs the threads timeline based on all events recorded in
the snapshot as precisely as possible, based on the recording configuration.
* Locks tab - allows the user to analyze threads synchronization.
* File IO tab - presents information on read and write events to the filesystem.
* Socket IO tab - presents information on read and write events to the network.
* Sampler tab - shows per-thread CPU utilization and memory allocations, and a
heap histogram. There is also an experimental feature, "CPU sampler," for building a CPU
snapshot from the recorded events. It does not provide an exact performance
analysis but still helps to understand what was going on in the recorded
application, and where the CPU bottleneck might be.
* Browser tab - provides a generic browser of all events recorded in the snapshot.
* Environment tab - gives an overview of the recording machine setup and conditions
like CPU model, memory size, operating system version, CPU utilization, memory
usage, etc.
* Recording tab - lists the recording settings and basic snapshot telemetry like
number of events, total recording time, etc.

Note: The support of JDK Flight Recorder is currently experimental. Some advanced features like analyzing JVM internals, showing event stack traces, or support for creating JFR snapshots from live processes are not available in this preview version and will be addressed incrementally in the following releases.
